README.md, before:

---
eip: XXX
title: Conditional Tokens
description: An interface for tokens representing positions on outcomes that can be split, merged and redeemed based on oracle reported results
author: shafu (@shafu0x), Behzad (@bitnician)
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: ERC
created: 2025-12-16
requires: 6909
---

## Abstract

This ERC extends ERC-6909 with conditional tokens that allow participants to create and settle positions on future outcomes.

It introduces three core operations. Splitting collateral into outcome positions, merging positions back into collateral and redeeming positions after oracle resolution.

## Motivation

Prediction markets have demonstrated product market fit through platforms like Polymarket. The Gnosis Conditional Tokens framework from 2019 pioneered the core primitives of splitting, merging, and redeeming positions based on oracle outcomes. But there is no formal ERC standard, limiting interoperability.

To enable a thriving ecosystem of prediction markets and futarchy governance we need a standard interface. This ERC addresses this through three core operations:

1. **Condition Preparation**: Registers a condition with an oracle, question identifier and outcome count.
2. **Position Splitting & Merging**: Converts collateral into outcome tokens (split) or recombines them (merge).
3. **Redemptions**: Token holders can claim collateral proportional to the reported payout weights after oracle resolution.

This ERC formalizes patterns that the prediction market industry has battle-tested for years. Providing one interface will accelerate adoption across chains and applications.

## Specification

### Methods

#### prepareCondition

Initialize a new condition with a fixed number of outcomes. The function generates a `conditionId` which is the `keccak256(abi.encodePacked(oracle, questionId, outcomeSlotCount))` and initializes a payout vector associated to the `conditionId`

##### Parameters

- `oracle`: Account used to resolve a condition by reporting its result by calling `reportPayouts`. The `conditionId` is bound to the oracle address, so only that oracle can resolve the condition.
- `questionId`: Identifier for the question to be answered by `oracle`
- `outcomeSlotCount`: Number of outcomes for a condition. **MUST BE** `> 1` and `<= 256`

```js
function prepareCondition(address oracle, bytes32 questionId, uint outcomeSlotCount) external
```

#### reportPayouts

Oracle resolves a condition by calling this function and reports payouts for each outcome

##### Parameters

- `questionId`: Identifier for the question to be answered by `oracle`
- `payouts`: Oracle reported payout numerators per outcome slot. **MUST** satisfy
  `payouts.length == outcomeSlotCount` and `payoutDenominator = Σ payouts[i] > 0`. The payout fraction for
  outcome slot `i` is `payouts[i] / payoutDenominator`.

**NOTE**:
`msg.sender` is enforced as the oracle, because conditionId is derived from `(msg.sender, questionId, payouts.length)`.

```js
function reportPayouts(bytes32 questionId, uint[] calldata payouts) external
```

#### splitPosition

Convert one `parent` stake into multiple `child` outcome positions defined by `partition`. If `parentCollectionId == bytes32(0)` and `indexSetUnion == fullIndexSet`, transfers `amount` collateral from the message sender; otherwise, burns `amount` of the position being split. In both cases, mints `amount` of each child position defined by `partition`.

##### Parameters

- `collateralToken`: The address of the position's backing collateral token
- `parentCollectionId`: Outcome collection ID common to the position being split and the split target positions, or `bytes32(0)` if there's no parent outcome collection.
- `conditionId`: Condition being split on.
- `partition`: Array of disjoint index sets defining a non-trivial partition of an `indexSetUnion`, where
  `fullIndexSet = (1 << outcomeSlotCount) - 1` and `indexSetUnion = partition[0] | partition[1] | ...`.
  Each element **MUST** be `> 0` and `< fullIndexSet`, and elements **MUST** be pairwise disjoint.
  `indexSetUnion` **MAY** be a strict subset of `fullIndexSet`.
  - Example (full): outcomeSlotCount=2, `A = 0b01`, `B = 0b10`, partition `[A, B]` has `indexSetUnion = 0b11 (= fullIndexSet)`
  - Example (partial): outcomeSlotCount=3, `B = 0b010`, `C = 0b100`, partition `[B, C]` has `indexSetUnion = 0b110 (!= fullIndexSet)`
- `amount`: Amount of collateral (only if `parentCollectionId == bytes32(0)` and `indexSetUnion == fullIndexSet`) or position tokens to convert into the partitioned positions.

**NOTE**
`bytes32(0)` means “no parent outcome collection”. When `indexSetUnion != fullIndexSet`, the position being
split is the subset position for `indexSetUnion` (not collateral), even if `parentCollectionId == bytes32(0)`.

A `parent` outcome collection represents a position already conditioned on prior outcomes, while a `child` outcome collection represents an additional condition on top of it.
E.g. Assume to condition statements C1 and C2 where C1 is the parent condition of C2 where:

1.  C1 is “ETH > $3k?”
2.  C2 is “ETH > $4k?”

The outcomes of `C1` are prior outcomes for `C2`, because `C2` is only evaluated within the branch where `C1` is valid.

```js
function splitPosition(
        IERC20 collateralToken,
        bytes32 parentCollectionId,
        bytes32 conditionId,
        uint[] calldata partition,
        uint amount
    ) external
```

#### mergePositions

The inverse of `splitPosition`: burn multiple child positions to recreate a parent or subset position, or get back collateral.

##### Parameters

- `collateralToken`: The address of the position's backing collateral token
- `parentCollectionId`: Outcome collection ID common to the positions being merged and the merge result position, or `bytes32(0)` if there's no parent outcome collection.
- `conditionId`: Condition being split on.
- `partition`: Array of disjoint index sets defining a non-trivial partition of the outcome slots.
- `amount`: Burns amount of each child position defined by partition

**NOTE**
Let `indexSetUnion = partition[0] | partition[1] | ...` and `fullIndexSet = (1 << outcomeSlotCount) - 1`.
- If `indexSetUnion == fullIndexSet`, either collateral is sent back to the caller (if `parentCollectionId == bytes32(0)`) or `amount` of the parent position token is minted.
- If `indexSetUnion != fullIndexSet`, `amount` of the merged subset position token for `indexSetUnion` is minted (even if `parentCollectionId == bytes32(0)`).

```js
function mergePositions(
        IERC20 collateralToken,
        bytes32 parentCollectionId,
        bytes32 conditionId,
        uint[] calldata partition,
        uint amount
    ) external
```

#### redeemPositions

After a condition is resolved, redeem outcome position tokens for their payout share.

##### Parameters

- `collateralToken`: The address of the position's backing collateral token
- `parentCollectionId`: Either `bytes32(0)` for direct redemption for collateral or identifier of the parent collectionId for nested redemption
- `conditionId`: resolved condition
- `indexSets`: List of outcome collections (bitmasks) whose positions the caller wants to redeem.

**FLOW**
For each `indexSet`, computes the caller’s balance of the corresponding `positionId`, burns it, and adds
`payout += stake * payoutNumerator(indexSet) / payoutDenominator`. `payoutNumerator(indexSet)` is defined as
the sum of the per-outcome `payouts[i]` for which `indexSet` has the i-th bit set. Finally, transfers
collateral payout to the caller if (`parentCollectionId == bytes32(0)`) or mints the parent position token if
nested.

```js
function redeemPositions(IERC20 collateralToken, bytes32 parentCollectionId, bytes32 conditionId, uint[] calldata indexSets) external
```

#### getOutcomeSlotCount

Returns outcome slot count of a `conditionId`

##### Parameters

- `conditionId`: ID of the condition

```js
function getOutcomeSlotCount(bytes32 conditionId) external view returns (uint)
```

#### getConditionId

Returns generated `conditionId` which is the `keccak256(abi.encodePacked(oracle, questionId, outcomeSlotCount))`

##### Parameters

- `oracle`: The account assigned to report the result for the prepared condition
- `questionId`: An identifier for the question to be answered by the oracle
- `outcomeSlotCount`: The number of outcome slots which should be used for this condition. Must not exceed 256

```js
function getConditionId(address oracle, bytes32 questionId, uint outcomeSlotCount) external pure returns (bytes32)
```

#### getCollectionId

Returns `collectionId` constructed by a parent collection and an outcome collection.

##### Parameters

- `parentCollectionId`: Collection ID of the parent outcome collection, or bytes32(0) if there's no parent
- `conditionId`: Condition ID of the outcome collection to combine with the parent outcome collection
- `indexSet`: Index set of the outcome collection to combine with the parent outcome collection

```js
function getCollectionId(bytes32 parentCollectionId, bytes32 conditionId, uint indexSet) external pure returns (bytes32)
```

#### getPositionId

Returns positionID from collateral token and outcome collection associated to the position

##### Parameters

- `collateralToken`: Collateral token which backs the position
- `collectionId`: ID of the outcome collection associated with this position

```js
function getPositionId(IERC20 collateralToken, bytes32 collectionId) external pure returns (uint)
```

### Events

#### ConditionPreparation

Emitted when a new condition is initialized

```js
event ConditionPreparation(
        bytes32 indexed conditionId,
        address indexed oracle,
        bytes32 indexed questionId,
        uint outcomeSlotCount
    )
```

#### ConditionResolution

Emitted when oracle executes `reportPayouts` with payouts for a certain `questionId`

```js
event ConditionResolution(
        bytes32 indexed conditionId,
        address indexed oracle,
        bytes32 indexed questionId,
        uint outcomeSlotCount,
        uint[] payoutNumerators
    )
```

#### PositionSplit

Emitted when a user splits collateral or position into multiple outcome positions

```js
event PositionSplit(
        address indexed stakeholder,
        IERC20 collateralToken,
        bytes32 indexed parentCollectionId,
        bytes32 indexed conditionId,
        uint[] partition,
        uint amount
    )
```

#### PositionsMerge

Emitted when a user merges multiple positions back into a parent position or collateral

```js
event PositionsMerge(
        address indexed stakeholder,
        IERC20 collateralToken,
        bytes32 indexed parentCollectionId,
        bytes32 indexed conditionId,
        uint[] partition,
        uint amount
    )
```

#### PayoutRedemption

Emitted when a user redeems positions after resolution

```js
event PayoutRedemption(
        address indexed redeemer,
        IERC20 indexed collateralToken,
        bytes32 indexed parentCollectionId,
        bytes32 conditionId,
        uint[] indexSets,
        uint payout
    )
```

## Security Considerations

### Oracle Trust

The oracle has absolute authority over payout distribution. A malicious or compromised oracle can direct all collateral to chosen outcomes with no on-chain dispute mechanism. Implementers SHOULD consider multi-sig oracles, time-locked reporting, or staking with slashing conditions.

### External Calls and Collateral Tokens

Functions interacting with collateral tokens via `transfer` and `transferFrom` are susceptible to reentrancy if the token has callbacks (e.g., ERC-777). Implementations MUST follow checks-effects-interactions or use reentrancy guards.

Non-standard tokens (fee-on-transfer, rebasing) may cause accounting discrepancies. Implementations SHOULD document supported token types or measure actual balance changes.

### Front-Running

Oracle resolution transactions are visible in the mempool. Attackers can front-run `reportPayouts` to acquire winning positions before resolution. Applications SHOULD consider commit-reveal schemes or private mempools.

### Denial of Service

`prepareCondition` is permissionless and allocates storage. Attackers can spam condition creation to bloat storage. Implementations MAY require deposits or restrict creation to authorized registries.

Commit message:

add usage section on Nested conditionals and futarchy.

README.md, after:

---
eip: XXX
title: Conditional Tokens
description: An interface for tokens representing positions on outcomes that can be split, merged and redeemed based on oracle reported results
author: shafu (@shafu0x), Behzad (@bitnician)
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: ERC
created: 2025-12-16
requires: 6909
---

## Abstract

This ERC extends ERC-6909 with conditional tokens that allow participants to create and settle positions on future outcomes.

It introduces three core operations. Splitting collateral into outcome positions, merging positions back into collateral and redeeming positions after oracle resolution.

## Motivation

Prediction markets have demonstrated product market fit through platforms like Polymarket. The Gnosis Conditional Tokens framework from 2019 pioneered the core primitives of splitting, merging, and redeeming positions based on oracle outcomes. But there is no formal ERC standard, limiting interoperability.

To enable a thriving ecosystem of prediction markets and futarchy governance we need a standard interface. This ERC addresses this through three core operations:

1. **Condition Preparation**: Registers a condition with an oracle, question identifier and outcome count.
2. **Position Splitting & Merging**: Converts collateral into outcome tokens (split) or recombines them (merge).
3. **Redemptions**: Token holders can claim collateral proportional to the reported payout weights after oracle resolution.

This ERC formalizes patterns that the prediction market industry has battle-tested for years. Providing one interface will accelerate adoption across chains and applications.

## Usage

This section is non-normative.

### Nested conditionals

Nested positions (via `parentCollectionId`) allow conditioning a position on multiple conditions. This is used for (i) decision markets / futarchy, where downstream markets are only meaningful under a particular decision branch, and (ii) outcome refinement, where an existing outcome set is further split by introducing a child condition under that set (instead of mutating the parent condition).

## Specification

### Methods

#### prepareCondition

Initialize a new condition with a fixed number of outcomes. The function generates a `conditionId` which is the `keccak256(abi.encodePacked(oracle, questionId, outcomeSlotCount))` and initializes a payout vector associated to the `conditionId`

##### Parameters

- `oracle`: Account used to resolve a condition by reporting its result by calling `reportPayouts`. The `conditionId` is bound to the oracle address, so only that oracle can resolve the condition.
- `questionId`: Identifier for the question to be answered by `oracle`
- `outcomeSlotCount`: Number of outcomes for a condition. **MUST BE** `> 1` and `<= 256`

```js
function prepareCondition(address oracle, bytes32 questionId, uint outcomeSlotCount) external
```

#### reportPayouts

Oracle resolves a condition by calling this function and reports payouts for each outcome

##### Parameters

- `questionId`: Identifier for the question to be answered by `oracle`
- `payouts`: Oracle reported payout numerators per outcome slot. **MUST** satisfy
  `payouts.length == outcomeSlotCount` and `payoutDenominator = Σ payouts[i] > 0`. The payout fraction for
  outcome slot `i` is `payouts[i] / payoutDenominator`.

**NOTE**:
`msg.sender` is enforced as the oracle, because conditionId is derived from `(msg.sender, questionId, payouts.length)`.

```js
function reportPayouts(bytes32 questionId, uint[] calldata payouts) external
```

#### splitPosition

Convert one `parent` stake into multiple `child` outcome positions defined by `partition`. If `parentCollectionId == bytes32(0)` and `indexSetUnion == fullIndexSet`, transfers `amount` collateral from the message sender; otherwise, burns `amount` of the position being split. In both cases, mints `amount` of each child position defined by `partition`.

##### Parameters

- `collateralToken`: The address of the position's backing collateral token
- `parentCollectionId`: Outcome collection ID common to the position being split and the split target positions, or `bytes32(0)` if there's no parent outcome collection.
- `conditionId`: Condition being split on.
- `partition`: Array of disjoint index sets defining a non-trivial partition of an `indexSetUnion`, where
  `fullIndexSet = (1 << outcomeSlotCount) - 1` and `indexSetUnion = partition[0] | partition[1] | ...`.
  Each element **MUST** be `> 0` and `< fullIndexSet`, and elements **MUST** be pairwise disjoint.
  `indexSetUnion` **MAY** be a strict subset of `fullIndexSet`.
  - Example (full): outcomeSlotCount=2, `A = 0b01`, `B = 0b10`, partition `[A, B]` has `indexSetUnion = 0b11 (= fullIndexSet)`
  - Example (partial): outcomeSlotCount=3, `B = 0b010`, `C = 0b100`, partition `[B, C]` has `indexSetUnion = 0b110 (!= fullIndexSet)`
- `amount`: Amount of collateral (only if `parentCollectionId == bytes32(0)` and `indexSetUnion == fullIndexSet`) or position tokens to convert into the partitioned positions.

**NOTE**
`bytes32(0)` means “no parent outcome collection”. When `indexSetUnion != fullIndexSet`, the position being
split is the subset position for `indexSetUnion` (not collateral), even if `parentCollectionId == bytes32(0)`.

A `parent` outcome collection represents a position already conditioned on prior outcomes, while a `child` outcome collection represents an additional condition on top of it.
E.g. Assume to condition statements C1 and C2 where C1 is the parent condition of C2 where:

1.  C1 is “ETH > $3k?”
2.  C2 is “ETH > $4k?”

The outcomes of `C1` are prior outcomes for `C2`, because `C2` is only evaluated within the branch where `C1` is valid.

```js
function splitPosition(
        IERC20 collateralToken,
        bytes32 parentCollectionId,
        bytes32 conditionId,
        uint[] calldata partition,
        uint amount
    ) external
```

#### mergePositions

The inverse of `splitPosition`: burn multiple child positions to recreate a parent or subset position, or get back collateral.

##### Parameters

- `collateralToken`: The address of the position's backing collateral token
- `parentCollectionId`: Outcome collection ID common to the positions being merged and the merge result position, or `bytes32(0)` if there's no parent outcome collection.
- `conditionId`: Condition being split on.
- `partition`: Array of disjoint index sets defining a non-trivial partition of the outcome slots.
- `amount`: Burns amount of each child position defined by partition

**NOTE**
Let `indexSetUnion = partition[0] | partition[1] | ...` and `fullIndexSet = (1 << outcomeSlotCount) - 1`.
- If `indexSetUnion == fullIndexSet`, either collateral is sent back to the caller (if `parentCollectionId == bytes32(0)`) or `amount` of the parent position token is minted.
- If `indexSetUnion != fullIndexSet`, `amount` of the merged subset position token for `indexSetUnion` is minted (even if `parentCollectionId == bytes32(0)`).

```js
function mergePositions(
        IERC20 collateralToken,
        bytes32 parentCollectionId,
        bytes32 conditionId,
        uint[] calldata partition,
        uint amount
    ) external
```

#### redeemPositions

After a condition is resolved, redeem outcome position tokens for their payout share.

##### Parameters

- `collateralToken`: The address of the position's backing collateral token
- `parentCollectionId`: Either `bytes32(0)` for direct redemption for collateral or identifier of the parent collectionId for nested redemption
- `conditionId`: resolved condition
- `indexSets`: List of outcome collections (bitmasks) whose positions the caller wants to redeem.

**FLOW**
For each `indexSet`, computes the caller’s balance of the corresponding `positionId`, burns it, and adds
`payout += stake * payoutNumerator(indexSet) / payoutDenominator`. `payoutNumerator(indexSet)` is defined as
the sum of the per-outcome `payouts[i]` for which `indexSet` has the i-th bit set. Finally, transfers
collateral payout to the caller if (`parentCollectionId == bytes32(0)`) or mints the parent position token if
nested.

```js
function redeemPositions(IERC20 collateralToken, bytes32 parentCollectionId, bytes32 conditionId, uint[] calldata indexSets) external
```

#### getOutcomeSlotCount

Returns outcome slot count of a `conditionId`

##### Parameters

- `conditionId`: ID of the condition

```js
function getOutcomeSlotCount(bytes32 conditionId) external view returns (uint)
```

#### getConditionId

Returns generated `conditionId` which is the `keccak256(abi.encodePacked(oracle, questionId, outcomeSlotCount))`

##### Parameters

- `oracle`: The account assigned to report the result for the prepared condition
- `questionId`: An identifier for the question to be answered by the oracle
- `outcomeSlotCount`: The number of outcome slots which should be used for this condition. Must not exceed 256

```js
function getConditionId(address oracle, bytes32 questionId, uint outcomeSlotCount) external pure returns (bytes32)
```

#### getCollectionId

Returns `collectionId` constructed by a parent collection and an outcome collection.

##### Parameters

- `parentCollectionId`: Collection ID of the parent outcome collection, or bytes32(0) if there's no parent
- `conditionId`: Condition ID of the outcome collection to combine with the parent outcome collection
- `indexSet`: Index set of the outcome collection to combine with the parent outcome collection

```js
function getCollectionId(bytes32 parentCollectionId, bytes32 conditionId, uint indexSet) external pure returns (bytes32)
```

#### getPositionId

Returns positionID from collateral token and outcome collection associated to the position

##### Parameters

- `collateralToken`: Collateral token which backs the position
- `collectionId`: ID of the outcome collection associated with this position

```js
function getPositionId(IERC20 collateralToken, bytes32 collectionId) external pure returns (uint)
```

### Events

#### ConditionPreparation

Emitted when a new condition is initialized

```js
event ConditionPreparation(
        bytes32 indexed conditionId,
        address indexed oracle,
        bytes32 indexed questionId,
        uint outcomeSlotCount
    )
```

#### ConditionResolution

Emitted when oracle executes `reportPayouts` with payouts for a certain `questionId`

```js
event ConditionResolution(
        bytes32 indexed conditionId,
        address indexed oracle,
        bytes32 indexed questionId,
        uint outcomeSlotCount,
        uint[] payoutNumerators
    )
```

#### PositionSplit

Emitted when a user splits collateral or position into multiple outcome positions

```js
event PositionSplit(
        address indexed stakeholder,
        IERC20 collateralToken,
        bytes32 indexed parentCollectionId,
        bytes32 indexed conditionId,
        uint[] partition,
        uint amount
    )
```

#### PositionsMerge

Emitted when a user merges multiple positions back into a parent position or collateral

```js
event PositionsMerge(
        address indexed stakeholder,
        IERC20 collateralToken,
        bytes32 indexed parentCollectionId,
        bytes32 indexed conditionId,
        uint[] partition,
        uint amount
    )
```

#### PayoutRedemption

Emitted when a user redeems positions after resolution

```js
event PayoutRedemption(
        address indexed redeemer,
        IERC20 indexed collateralToken,
        bytes32 indexed parentCollectionId,
        bytes32 conditionId,
        uint[] indexSets,
        uint payout
    )
```

## Security Considerations

### Oracle Trust

The oracle has absolute authority over payout distribution. A malicious or compromised oracle can direct all collateral to chosen outcomes with no on-chain dispute mechanism. Implementers SHOULD consider multi-sig oracles, time-locked reporting, or staking with slashing conditions.

### External Calls and Collateral Tokens

Functions interacting with collateral tokens via `transfer` and `transferFrom` are susceptible to reentrancy if the token has callbacks (e.g., ERC-777). Implementations MUST follow checks-effects-interactions or use reentrancy guards.

Non-standard tokens (fee-on-transfer, rebasing) may cause accounting discrepancies. Implementations SHOULD document supported token types or measure actual balance changes.

### Front-Running

Oracle resolution transactions are visible in the mempool. Attackers can front-run `reportPayouts` to acquire winning positions before resolution. Applications SHOULD consider commit-reveal schemes or private mempools.

### Denial of Service

`prepareCondition` is permissionless and allocates storage. Attackers can spam condition creation to bloat storage. Implementations MAY require deposits or restrict creation to authorized registries.
